Use me well in it.
Sister, prove such a wife as mythoughts make thee
and as my uarthest band shallpass on thy approof.
Most noble Antony, let not thepiece of virtue,
which is set betwixt us as thecement of our love,
to keep it builded, be the ramto batter the fortress of it.
For better might we have lovedwithout this mean
if on both parts this be notcherished.
Make me not offended in yourdistrust.
I have said.
You shall not find, though yoube therein curious,
the least cause for what youseem to fear.
So the gods keep you
and make the hearts of Romansserve your ends.
We will here part.
Farewell, my dearest sister.
Fare thee well.
The elements be kind to thee
and make thy spirits all ofcomfort.
Fare thee well.
My noble brother.
The April's in her eyes.
It is love's spring, and thesethe showers to bring it on.
Be cheerful.
Sir, look well to my husband'shouse and
What, Octavia?
I'll tell you in your ear.
Her tongue will not obey herheart,
nor can her heart inform hertongue.
The swan's down-feather thatstands upon the swell
at full of tide and neither wayinclines.
Will Caesar weep?
Why, Enobarbus,
when Antony found Julius Caesardead,
he cried almost to roaring,
and he wept when at Philippi hefound Brutus slain.
That year, indeed, he wastroubled with a rheum.
Oh, sweet Octavia, you shallhear from me still.
The time shall not outgo mythinking on you.
Come, sir, come.
I'll wrestle with you in mystrength of love.
Look, here I have you.
Thus, I let you go and give youto the gods.
Adieu; be happy.
Let all the number of the starsgive light to thy fair way.
Farewell. Farewell.
Farewell.
Where is the fellow?
Half afeard to come.
Go to, go to.
Come hither, sir.
Come thou near.
Most gracious majestyó
Didst thou behold Octavia?
Ay, dread queen.
Where?
Madam, in Rome.
I looked her in the face
and saw her led between herbrother and Mark Antony.
Is she as tall as me?
She is not, madam.
Didst hear her speak?
Is she shrill-tongued or low?
Madam, I heard her speak; she islow-voiced.
That's not so good.
He cannot like her long.
Like her! O Isis, 'tisimpossible.
I think so, Charmianó dull oftongue and dwarfish!
What majesty is in her gait?
Remember, if ever thou look'dston majesty.
She creeps.
Her motion and her station areas one.
She shows a body rather than alife,
a statue than a breather.
Is this certain?
Or I have no observance.
Three in Egypt cannot makebetter note.
He's very knowing, I do perceiveit.
There's nothing in her yet.
The fellow has good judgment.
Excellent.
Guess at her years, I prithee.
Madam, she was a widow.
Widow! Charmian, hark.
And I do think she's thirty.
Bear'st thou her face in mind?
Is it long or round?
Round, even to faultiness.
For the most part, too, they arefoolish that are so.
Her hair, what color?
Brown, madam,
and her forehead as low as shewould wish it.
There's gold for thee.
Thou must not take my formersharpness ill.
I will employ thee back again.
I find thee most fit forbusiness.
Go, make thee ready.
Our letters are prepared.
A proper man.
Indeed, he is so.
I repent me much that so Iharried him.
Why, methinks, by him, thiscreature's no such thing.
Nothing, madam.
The man hath seen some majestyand should know.
Hath he seen majesty?
Isis else defend and serving youso long.
I have one thing more to ask himyet, good Charmian.
But 'tis no matter.
Thou shalt bring him to me whereI will write.
All may be well enough.
Nay, nay, Octavia, not onlythat.
That were excusable,
that and thousands more offsemblable import.
But he hath waged new warsagainst Pompeyó
made his will and read it topublic ear,
spoke scantly of me
when perforce he could not butpay me terms of honor.
My good lord, believe not all,
or if you must believe, stomachnot all.
A more unhappy lady, if thisdivision chance,
never stood between praying forboth parts.
The good gods will mock mepresently
when I shall pray, "O, bless mylord and husband!"
Undo that prayerby crying out asloud,
"O, bless my brother!"
Husband, win; win, brother.
Prays, and destroys the prayer.
No midway twixt these extremesat all.
Gentle Octavia.
Let your best love draw to thatpoint
which seeks best to preserve it.
If I lose mine honor, I losemyself.
Better I were not yours thanyours so branchless.
But, as you requested, yourselfshall go between us.
The meantime, lady,
I'll raise the preparation of awar shall stain your brother.
Make your soonest haste so yourdesires are yours.
Thanks to my lord.
The Jove of power make me mostweak, most weak.
Your reconciler.
Wars twixt you twain would be asif the world should cleave
and that slain men should solderup the rift.
When it appears to you wherethis begins,
turn your displeasure that way,
for our faults can never be soequal
that your love can equally movewith them.
Provide your going, choose yourown company,
and command what cost your hearthas mind to.
How now, friend Eros.
There's strange news come, sir.
What, man?
Caesar and Lepidus have madewars upon Pompey.
This is old; what is thesuccess?
Caesar, having made use of himin the wars against Pompey,
presently denied him rivality,
would not let him partake in theglory of the action,
and, not resting here,
accuses him of letters he hadformerly wrote to Pompey.
Upon his own appeal, seizes him.
So the poor third is up tilldeath enlarge his confine.
Then, world, thou hast a pair ofchaps, no more.
Contemning Rome,
he has done all this and more inAlexandria.
Here's the manner of it.
In the marketplace, on atribunal silvered,
Cleopatra and himself in chairsof gold
were publicly enthroned.
At the feet sat Caesarion, whomthey call my father's son
and all the unlawful issue
that their lust since then hathmade between them.
Unto her he gave thestablishment of Egypt,
made her of lower Syria, Cyprus,Lydia, absolute queen.
This in the public eye?
In the common showplace wherethey exercise.
His sons he there proclaimed thekings of kings.
Great Media, Parthia, andArmenia, he gave to Alexander.
To Ptolemy, he assigned Syria,Cilicia, Phoenicia.
She in the habiliments of thegoddess Isis that day appeared
and oft before gave audience as'tis reported so.
Let Rome be thus informed.
Who, queasy with his insolencealready, will their goodthoughts call from him.
The people knows it.
They have now received hisaccusations.
Who does he accuse?
Caesaróand that having in SicilySextus Pompeius spoiled,
we had not rated him his part ofthe isle.
Then does he say he lent me someshipping unrestored.
Lastly, he frets that Lepidus
of the triumvirate should bedeposed
and being that we detain all hisrevenue.
Sir, this should be answered.
'Tis done already, and themessenger gone.
I have told him, Lepidus wasgrown too cruel,
that he his high authorityabused,
and did deserve his change,
for what I have conquered, Igrant him part.
But then in his Armenia andother of his conquered kingdoms,
I demand the like.
He'll never yield to that.
Nor must not then be yielded toin this.
Hail, Caesar, and my lords!
Hail, most dear Caesar!
That ever I should call theecastaway.
You have not called me so, norhave you cause.
Why have you stolen upon usthus?
You come not like Caesar'ssister.
The wife of Antony should havean army for an usher,
and the neighs of horse to tellof her approach
long ere she did appear.
The trees by the way should haveborne men
and expectation fainted, longingfor what it had not.
Nay, the dust should haveascended to the roof of heaven,
raised by your populous troops,
but you are come a market maidto Rome
and have prevented theostentation of our love,
which left unshown is often leftunloved.
We should have met you by seaand land,
supplying every stage with anaugmented greeting.
Good my lord, to come thus was Inot constrained
but did it on my free will.
My lord, Mark Antony,
hearing that you prepared forwar,
acquainted my grieved earwithal,
whereon, I begged his pardon forreturn.
Which soon he granted,
being an obstruct 'tween hislust and him.
Do not say so, my lord.
I have eyes upon him,
and his affairs come to me onthe wind.
Where is he now?
My lord, in Athens.
No, my most wronged sister.
Cleopatra hath nodded him toher.
He hath given his empire up to awhore,
who now are levying the kings ofthe earth for war.
Ay me, most wretched,
that have my heart partedbetwixt two friends
that does afflict each other.
Cheer your heart.
Be you not troubled with thetime
which drives over your contentthese strong necessities.
But let determined things todestiny hold unbewailed theirway.
Welcome to Rome.
Nothing more dear to me.
You are abused beyond the markof thought
and the high gods to do youjustice,
make them ministers of us andthose that love you.
Best of comfort and ever welcometo us.
Welcome, lady.
Welcome, dear madam.
Each heart in Rome does love andpity you.
Only the adulterous Antony, mostlarge in his abominations,
turns you off and gives hispotent regiment to a trull
that noises it against us.
Is it so, sir?
Most certain.
Sister, welcome.
Pray you be ever known topatience.
My dearest sister.
I will be even with thee, doubtit not.
But why, why, why?
Thou hast forspoke my being inthese wars
and say'st it is not fit.
Well, is it? Is it?
If not denounced against us,
why should not we be there inperson?
Well, I could reply,
if we should serve with horseand mares together,
the horse were merely lost.
What is't you say?
Your presence needs must puzzleAntonyó
take from his heart, take fromhis brain,
from's time that should not thenbe spared.
He is already traduced forlevity.
And 'tis said in Rome thatPhotinus, an eunuch,
and your maids manage this war.
Sink Rome, and their tongues rotthat speak against us.
A charge we bear in the war
and, as the president of mykingdom, will appear there for aman.
Speak not against it; I will notstay behind.
Is it not strange, Canidius,
that from Tarentum andBrundusium
he could so quickly cut theIonian Sea
and take in Toryne?
You've heard on it, sweet?
Celerity is never more admiredthan by the negligent.
A good rebuke,
which might have well becomedthe best of men
to taunt at slackness.
Canidius, we will fight with himby sea.
By sea! What else?
Why will my lord do so?
For that he dares us to it.
Your ships are not well manned.
Your mariners are muleters,reapers,
people engrossed by swiftimpress.
In Caesar's fleet are those thatoften have against Pompeyfought.
Their ships are yare; yours,heavy.
No disgrace will fall you forrefusing him at sea,
being prepared for land.
By sea, by sea.
Most worthy sir, you thereinthrow away
the absolute soldiership youhave by land.
I'll fight at sea!
I have sixty sails; Caesar, nonebetter.
Our overplus of shipping will weburn
and with the rest full-mannedfrom the head of Actium
beat the approaching Caesar.
But if we fail, we then can doit at land.
How now, soldier?
O noble emperor, do not fight bysea.
Trust not to rotten planks.
Do you misdoubt this sword,these my wounds?
Let the Egyptians andPhoenicians go a-ducking.
We are used to conquer,
standing on the earth, fightingfoot-to-foot.
Well, well, away!
Set we our squadrons on yondside of the hill
in eye of Caesar's battle
from which place we may thenumber of the ships behold
and so proceed accordingly.
Strike not by land; keep whole.
Provoke not battle till we havedone at sea.
Do not exceed the prescript ofthis scroll.
Our fortune lies upon this jump.
Hark! The land bids me tread nomore upon it.
It is ashamed to bear me!
Friends, come hither.
I am so lated in the world thatI have lost my way forever.
I have a ship laden with gold.
Take that, divide it;
fly, and make your peace withCaesar.
Fly? Not we.
I have fled myself
and have instructed cowards torun and show their shoulders.
Friends, begone.
I have myself resolved upon acourse
which has no need of you.
Begone.
My treasure's in the harbor.Take it.
O, I followed that I blush tolook upon.
Leave me, I pray, a little.
Pray you, now.
Nay, do so, for indeed I havelost command.
Therefore, I pray you, I'll seeyou by and by.
Nay, gentle madam, to him,comfort him.
Do, most dear queen.
Do! Why, what else?
No, no, no, no, no.
The queen, my lord, the queen.
Go to him, madam. Speak withhim.
He is unqualitied with veryshame.
Well then, sustain me, O!
Most noble sir, arise; the queenapproaches.
Her head's declined and deathwill seize her,
but your comfort makes therescue.
I have offended reputation, amost unnoble swerving.
Sir, the queen.
O whither hast thou led me,Egypt?
See how I convey my shame out ofthine eyes
by looking back what I have leftbehind,
destroyed in dishonor.
O my lord, my lord,
forgive my fearful sails!
I little thought you would havefollowed.
Egypt, thou knew'st too well
my heart was to thy rudder tiedby the strings
and thou shouldst tow me after.
O'er my spirit thy fullsupremacy thou knew'st
and that thy beck might
from the bidding of the godscommand me.
O, my pardon.
Now I must to the young man sendhumble treaties,
dodge and palter in the shiftsof lowness,
who with half the bulk of theworld
played as I pleased, making andmarring fortunes.
You did know how much you weremy conqueror
and that my sword, made weak bymy affection,
would obey it on all cause.
Pardon, pardon.
Fall not a tear, I say;
one of them rates all that iswon and lost.
Give me a kiss.
Even this repays me.
We sent our schoolmaster; is hecome back?
Love, I am full of lead.
Some wine within there and ourviands!
Fortune knows we scorn her mostwhen most she offers blows.
Let him appear that's come fromAntony.
Know you him?
Caesar, 'tis his schoolmasteró
an argument that he is plucked
when hither he sends so poor apinion of his wing
which had superfluous kings formessengers
not many moons gone by.
Approach and speak.
Such as I am, I come fromAntony.
I was of late as petty to hisends as is the morn-dew
on the myrtle leaf to his grandsea.
Be it so; declare thine office.
Lord of his fortunes, he salutesthee
and requires to live in Egypt,
which not granted, he lessenshis requests;
and to thee sues to let himbreathe
between the heavens and earth, aprivate man in Athensó
this for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confess thygreatness,
submits her to thy might,
and of thee, craves the circleof the Ptolemies for her heirs,
now hazarded to thy grace.
For Antony,
I have no ears to his request.
The queen of audience nor desireshall fail,
so she from Egypt drive herall-disgraced friend,
or take his life there.
This if she perform, she shallnot sue unheard.
So to them both.
Fortune pursue thee!
Bring him through the bands.
To try thy eloquence now 'tistime; dispatch.
From Antony win Cleopatra;promise.
And in our name, what sherequires.
Add more from thine invention,offers.
Women are not in their bestfortunes strong,
but want will perjure thenever-touched vestal.
Try thy cunning, Thyreus.
Make thine own edict for thypains,
which we will answer as a law.
Caesar, I go.
Observe how Antony becomes hisflaw,
and what thou think'st his veryaction speaks
in every power that moves.
Caesar, I shall.
What shall we do, Enobarbus?
Think and die.
Is Antony or we in fault inthis?
Antony only, that would make hiswill lord of his reason.
What though you fled from thatgreat face of war,
whose several ranges frightedeach other,
why should he follow?
The itch of his affection
should not then have nicked hiscaptainship
at such a point when half tohalf the world opposed,
he being the meered question.
'Twas a shame no less than washis loss,
to course your flying flags andleave his navy gazing.
Prithee, peace.
Is that his answer?
Aye, my lord.
The queen shall then havecourtesy,
so she shall yield us up.
He says so.
Well, let her know it.
To the boy, Caesar send thisgrizzled head,
and he will fill thy wishes tothe brim with principalities.
That head, my lord?
To him again;
tell him he wears the rose ofyouth upon him
from which the world should notesomething particular.
His coin, ships, legions may bea coward's,
whose ministers would prevailunder the service of a child
as soon as in the command ofCaesar.
I dare him, therefore, to layhis gay comparisons apart
and answer me declined, swordagainst swordó
ourselves alone.
I'll write it; follow me.
Yes, like enough,
high-battled Caesar will unstatehis happiness
and be staged to the showagainst a sworder.
I see men's judgments are aparcel of their fortunes.
And things outward do draw theinward quality after them
to suffer all alike that heshould dream,
knowing all measures
the full Caesar will answer hisemptiness.
Caesar, thou hast subdued his isjudgment too.
A messenger from Caesar.
What, no more ceremony?
See, my women.
Against the blown rose may theystop their nose
that kneeled unto the buds.
Admit him, sir.
Mine honesty and I begin tosquare.
The loyalty well held to foolsdoes make our faith mere folly.
Yet he that can endure to followwith allegiance a fallen lord
does conquer him that did hismaster conquer
and earns a place in the story.
Caesar's will?
Hear it apart.
None but friends; say boldly.
So haply are they friends toAntony.
He needs as many, sir, as Caesarhas or needs not us.
If Caesar please, our masterwill leap to be his friend,
for us, you know, whose he is weare,
and that is Caesar's.
So.
Thus then, thou most renowned,
Caesar entreats not to considerin what case thou stand'st
further than he is Caesar.
Go on, right royal.
He knows that you embrace notAntony as you did love
but as you feared him.
O!
The scars upon your honor,therefore, he does pity
as constrained blemishes, not asdeserved.
He is a god and knows what ismost right.
Mine honor was not yielded butconquered merely.
To be sure of that, I will askAntony.
Sir, sir, thou art so leaky thatwe must leave thee to thysinking,
for thy dearest quit thee.
Shall I say to Caesar what yourequire of him?
For he partly begs to be desiredto give.
It much would please him that ofhis fortunes
you should make a staff to leanupon.
But it would warm his spirits
to hear from me that you hadleft Antony
and put yourself under hisshroud,
the universal landlord.
What's your name?
My name is Thyreus.
Most kind messenger, say togreat Caesar this:
in deputation, I kiss hisconquering hand.
Tell him, I am prompt to lay mycrown at his feet
and there to kneel.
Tell him from his all-obeyingbreath, I hear the doom ofEgypt.
'Tis your noblest course.
Wisdom and fortune combatingtogether.
If that the former dare but whatit can,
no chance may shake it.
Give me grace to lay my duty onyour hand.
Your Caesar's father oft,
when he hath mused of takingkingdoms in,
bestowed his lips on thatunworthy place as it rainedkisses.
Favors, by Jove that thunders!
What art thou, fellow?
One that but performs thebidding of the fullest man
and worthiest to have commandobeyed.
You will be whipped.
Approach there.
Ah, you kite!
Now gods and devils!
Authority melts from me.
Of late when I cried "ho" likeboys unto a muss,
kings would start forth and cry,"Your will?"
Have you no ears? I am Antonyyet!
Take hence this Jack and whiphim.
'Tis better playing with alion's whelp
than with an old one dying.
Moon and stars! Whip him.
Were it twenty of the greatesttributaries that do acknowledgeCaesar,
should I find them so saucy withthe hand of she here.
What's her name? Since she wasCleopatra?
Whip him, fellows, till like aboy
you see him cringe his face andwhine aloud for mercy.
Take him hence.
Mark Antony!
Tug him awayóbeing whipped,bring him again.
This Jack of Caesar's shall bearus an errand to him.
You were half blasted ere I knewyou.
Ha! Have I my pillow leftunpressed in Rome
forborne the getting of a lawfulrace
and by a gem of women
to be abused by one that lookson feeders?
Good my lordó
You have been a boggler ever.
But when we in our viciousnessgrow hardó
O misery on it then the wisegods seel our eyes,
in our own filth, drop our clearjudgments,
make us adore our errors,
laugh at us while we strut toour confusion.
O, is it come to this?
I found you as a morsel coldupon dead Caesar's trencher.
Nay, you were a fragment ofCneius Pompey's.
Besides what hotter hours,unregistered in vulgar fame,
you have luxuriously picked out.
For I am sure, though,
you can guess what temperanceshould be,
you know not what it is.
Wherefore is this?
To let a fellow that will takerewards
and say "God quit you!"
be familiar with my playfellow,your handó
this kingly seal and plighter ofhigh hearts!
O, that I were upon the hill ofBasan,
to outroar the horned herd,
for I have savage cause.
And to proclaim it civilly werelike a haltered neck
which does the hangman thank forbeing yare about him.
Is he whipped?
Soundly, my lord.
Cried he and begged a pardon?
He did ask a favor.
If that thy father live,
let him repent thou wast notmade his daughter,
and be thou sorry to followCaesar in his triumph
since thou hast been whipped forfollowing him.
Henceforth, the white hand of alady fever thee,
shake thou to look on it.
Get thee back to Caesar; tellhim thy entertainment.
Look, thou say he makes me angrywith him
for he seems proud anddisdainful,
harping on what I am, not whathe knew I was.
He makes me angry!
And at this time most easy 'tisto do it
when my good stars that were myformer guides
have empty left their orbs
and shot their fires into theabysm of hell.
If he mislike my speech and whatis done,
tell him he has Hipparchus, myenfranched bondman,
whom he may at pleasure whip, orhang, or torture
as he shall like to quit me.
Urge it thou. Hence, with thystripes, begone.
Have you done yet?
Alack, our terrene moon is noweclipsed.
And it portends alone the fallof Antony.
I must stay his time.
To flatter Caesar would youmingle eyes
with one that ties his points?
Not know me yet?
Coldhearted toward me?
Ah, dear, if I be so,
from my cold heart let heavenengender hail,
and poison it in the source,
and the first stone drop in myneck
as it determines so dissolve mylife.
The next Caesarion smite,
till by degrees the memory of mywomb,
together with my brave Egyptiansall,
by the discandying of thispelleted storm,
lie graveless
till the flies and gnats of Nilehave buried them for prey.
I am satisfied.
Caesar sits down in Alexandria,where I will oppose his fate.
Our force by land hath noblyheld.
Our navy, too, have knit again,
and fleet threatening mostsea-like.
Where hast thou been, my heart?
Dost thou hear, lady?
If from the field I shall returnonce more to kiss these lips,
I will appear in blood.
I and my sword will earn ourchronicle.
There's hope in it yet.
That's my brave lord.
I will be treble-sinewed,hearted, breathed,
and fight maliciously.
For when mine hours were niceand lucky,
men did ransom lives of me forjests.
But now I'll set my teeth
and send to darkness all thatstop me.
Come, let's have one other gaudynight.
Call to me all my sad captains.
Fill our bowls once more.
Let's mock the midnight bell
It is my birthday.
I had thought to have held itpoor,
but since my lord is Antonyagain,
I will be Cleopatra.
We will yet do well.
Call all his noble captains tomy lord.
Do so; we'll speak to them.
And tonight I'll force the winepeep through their scars.
Come, my queen, there's sap init yet.
The next time I do fight I'llmake death love me,
for I will contend even with hispestilent scythe.
Now he'll outstare thelightning.
To be furious is to be frightedout of fear.
And in that mood, the dove willpeck the estridge.
And I see still a diminution
in our captain's brain restoreshis heart.
When valor preys on reason,
it eats the sword it fightswith.
I will seek some way to leavehim.